Intent


Represent an operation to be performed on the elements of an object
structure.  Visitor lets you define a new operation without changing
the classes of the elements on which it operates.
The classic technique for recovering lost type information.
Do the right thing based on the type of two objects.
Double dispatch



Problem

Many distinct and unrelated operations need to be performed on node
objects in a heterogeneous aggregate structure.  You want to avoid "polluting"
the node classes with these operations.  And, you don't want to
have to query the type of each node and cast the pointer to the
correct type before performing the desired operation.


Discussion

Visitor's primary purpose is to abstract functionality that can be
applied to an aggregate hierarchy of "element" objects.  The
approach encourages designing lightweight Element classes - because
processing functionality is removed from their list of
responsibilities.  New functionality can easily be added to the
original inheritance hierarchy by creating a new Visitor subclass.
Visitor implements "double dispatch".  OO messages routinely manifest
"single dispatch" - the operation that is executed depends on: the name
of the request, and the type of the receiver.  In "double dispatch",
the operation executed depends on:  the name of the request, and the
type of TWO receivers (the type of the Visitor and the type of the
element it visits).
The implementation proceeds as follows.  Create a Visitor class
hierarchy that defines a pure virtual visit() method in the abstract
base class for each concrete derived class in the aggregate node
hierarchy.  Each visit() method accepts a single argument - a pointer
or reference to an original Element derived class.
Each operation to be supported is modelled with a concrete derived
class of the Visitor hierarchy.  The visit() methods declared in the
Visitor base class are now defined in each derived subclass by
allocating the "type query and cast" code in the original
implementation to the appropriate overloaded visit() method.
Add a single pure virtual accept() method to the base class of the
Element hierarchy.  accept() is defined to receive a single
argument - a pointer or reference to the abstract base class of the
Visitor hierarchy.
Each concrete derived class of the Element hierarchy implements the
accept() method by simply calling the visit() method on the concrete
derived instance of the Visitor hierarchy that it was passed, passing
its "this" pointer as the sole argument.
Everything for "elements" and "visitors" is now set-up.  When the client
needs an operation to be performed, (s)he creates an instance of the
Visitor object, calls the accept() method on each Element
object, and passes the Visitor object.
The accept() method causes flow of control to find the correct Element
subclass.  Then when the visit() method is invoked, flow of control is
vectored to the correct Visitor subclass. accept() dispatch plus visit()
dispatch equals double dispatch.
The Visitor pattern makes adding new operations (or utilities) easy -
simply add a new Visitor derived class.  But, if the subclasses in the
aggregate node hierarchy are not stable, keeping the Visitor subclasses
in sync requires a prohibitive amount of effort.
An acknowledged objection to the Visitor pattern is that is represents
a regression to functional decomposition - separate the algorithms from
the data structures.  While this is a legitimate interpretation,
perhaps a better perspective/rationale is the goal of promoting
non-traditional behavior to full object status.


Structure

The Element hierarchy is instrumented with a "universal method adapter".
The implementation of accept() in each Element derived class
is always the same.  But – it cannot be moved to the Element base
class and inherited by all derived classes because a reference to
this in the Element class always maps to the base type
Element.



When the polymorphic firstDispatch() method is called
on an abstract First object, the concrete type of that
object is "recovered".  When the polymorphic secondDispatch()
method is called on an abstract Second object, its
concrete type is "recovered".  The application functionality
appropriate for this pair of types can now be exercised.





